selection pressure and evolution (#771)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/09.evolution.md

While it is evident that SARS-CoV-2 exhibits moderate potential for ongoing and future evolution, the relationship between mutations and pathogenicity is not yet known.
Additional data is needed in order to understand patterns of evolutionary change and whether they are likely to affect virulence.

Several factors could promote the evolution of SARS-CoV-2 including immunodeficiency and the transient exposure to antibodies directed against SARS-CoV-2 proteins. 
A single case study of SARS-CoV-2 infection in an immunocompromised female with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and hypogammaglobulinemia [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.049] suggested that an accelerated evolution of the virus could occur in conditions of immunodeficiency. 
A first administration of convalescent plasma did not clear the virus, and an ensuing increase in the genomic diversity in the samples was observed, suggesting an accelerated evolution due to selection pressure. 

> A second administration of convalescent plasma was able to clear the virus from the host 105 days after the initial diagnosis. However, during the whole infection time, the patient was asymptomatic but contagious.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A second administration of convalescent plasma cleared the virus from the host 105 days after the initial diagnosis. However, during the entire infection time, the patient was asymptomatic but contagious.
```

Reviewer: Edited as per suggestion

A second single case study in a 45-year old male with antiphospholipid syndrome [@doi:10.1056/NEJMc2031364], confirmed the earlier results of a persistent COVID-19 symptom in immunocompromised patients after 154 days of diagnosis leading to the death of patient. 
The treatment included Remdesivir and the Regeneron anti-spike protein antibody cocktail. 

> Genomic analyses of the patient nasopharyngeal swabs confirmed an accelerated evolution of the virus through mutations in spike gene and the receptor-binding domain. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Genomic analyses of the patient's nasopharyngeal swabs confirmed an accelerated evolution of the virus through mutations in spike gene and the receptor-binding domain. 
```

> In summary, these two cases studies suggested an accelerated evolution and persistent shedding of the virus in conditions of immunodeficiency. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In summary, these two case studies suggested an accelerated evolution and persistent shedding of the virus in conditions of immunodeficiency. 
```

In particular, the first case highlighted the role of convalescent plasma in creating escape variants. 

> In fact, a study [@doi:10.1101/2020.12.28.424451] suggested that exposure to convalescent plasma in vitro could neutralize the virus after 7 days but after 45 days and up to 80 days, viral escape was promoted through mutations in the receptor-binding domain (RBD) and N-terminal domain (NTD). 

Reviewer 2: Wow this is a super fascinating paper! I skimmed it and I had no idea this kind of research was even going on, how cool!
Looking at it, I think it was 6 passages/38 days of stable neutralization, and then the 7th passage was on the 45th day? 
This study is super different than anything else I've read for this paper! Maybe a little more background would help explain what they did? I am not super clear on what PT188 was selected but here is my rough attempt (but please feel free to edit/modify!):
```suggestion
In fact, one study [@doi:10.1101/2020.12.28.424451] exposed the SARS-CoV-2 virus to convalescent plasma _in vitro_ repeatedly to see how much plasma was required to neutralize the virus.
The results of the first six exposures were similar, but they reported that after the seventh exposure (on day 45), the amount of plasma required began to increase.
In analyzing the viral variants present, they found that this viral escape was promoted by the sudden accumulation of mutations, especially in the receptor-binding domain (RBD) and N-terminal domain (NTD), that quickly rose in frequency.
By the thirteenth exposure (day 85), the virus had evolved three mutations and could not longer be neutralized by the plasma used.
```

Author: yes pretty cool right? I think with the machine learning natural language processing tool, these are two of the most exciting papers I've read in a while.

> Taken together, these observations could bring crucial information about the conditions and the kinetics of the development of resistance in SARS-CoV-2 and its implications of the design of vaccine regimens or the need for next generation vaccines.

Reviewer 2: I tried to suggest how to space out the ideas a little since there is a lot of info in this sentence!
```suggestion
Taken together, these observations suggest that evolutionary analyses of SARS-CoV-2 can provide crucial information about the conditions that promote resistance in SARS-CoV-2 and the kinetics of how resistance develops, information which will be important for understanding the implications of how vaccine regimens are designed and whether/when next-generation vaccines will be needed.
```

Author: it reads much better now!

> The evolved variants could occur by chance or through an adaptive process that confers a competitive advantage to the virus.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When variants occur, they can rise in frequency by chance or through an adaptive process that confers a competitive advantage to the virus.
```
I think this is talking about mutations arising and then undergoing either natural selection or drift, right? I just suggested a slight rephrase to make that more clear!

Author: I am sorry, somehow I missed those suggestions :) 
Totally agree on rephrasing this way.

> Variants that had the D614G mutation in the spike glycoprotein seemed to spread faster. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Variants that had the D614G mutation in the spike glycoprotein seemed to spread faster. 
```
Would it be possible to add a little more history of this variant? In the pathogenesis paper, we touched on it very briefly by saying:
> The ongoing evolution of the spike protein can be seen from the genomic data. For example, the mutation D614G became dominant by the end of May 2020, soon after its initial appearance in mid-March [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.06.043; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.09.032], and a variant carrying two mutations (N501Y and 69–70del) that was first observed in the UK in October 2020 [@doi:10.1016/j.jinf.2020.12.024] has quickly spread around the world [@url:https://www.who.int/csr/don/21-december-2020-sars-cov2-variant-united-kingdom/en/; @doi:10.1101/2020.12.28.20248906].

Reviewer 2: Maybe just add this as a note to look into later!
```suggestion
Variants that had the D614G mutation in the spike glycoprotein seemed to spread faster. <!-- TO DO: add more history of this variant?-->
```

Author: Sounds good. I think we need to discuss each variant in more detail in the evolution section.

> However, it has been suggested that the mutation occurred by early chance events rather than by adaptive events [@doi:10.1001/jama.2020.27124].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, it has been suggested that the mutation rose in frequency due to early chance events rather than by adaptive events [@doi:10.1001/jama.2020.27124].
```

> Another mutation, Y453F that occurred in the receptor binding domain of spike was first detected in mink, however, the transmission to humans has been established.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another mutation, Y453F, that occurred in the receptor binding domain of _S_, was first detected in mink; however, the transmission to humans has been established.
```

In mink, this mutation conferred an advantage by increasing the affinity towards ACE2 [@doi:10.1126/science.abe5901].

> Similarly, N501Y mutation induces an increased affinity towards human ACE2 and has been involved in the dominance of B1.1.7 by outcompeting other variants [@doi:10.1101/2020.12.24.20248822].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, N501Y mutation induces an increased affinity towards human ACE2 and has been involved in the dominance of B.1.1.7 by outcompeting other variants [@doi:10.1101/2020.12.24.20248822].
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Therefore, genomic surveillance is essential to prevent the emergence of super-spreaders [@doi:10.1126/science.abf2946].

> In addition, novel machine learning methods were developed to predict the mutations in the sequence that promote viral escape.

Reviewer 2: I would suggest leaving the "Therefore, genomic surveillance..." sentence at the end of the last paragraph, and then adding a new sentence setting up these even more creative approaches! Maybe something like:

```suggestion

Emerging methods are being applied to this problem in an effort to understand which mutations are most likely to be of significant concern.
Novel machine learning methods were developed to predict the mutations in the sequence that promote viral escape.
```

> While they preserve the pathogenicity of the virus, escape mutations change the virus sequence to evade detection by the immune system. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While they preserve the pathogenicity of the virus, escape mutations change the virus's sequence to evade detection by the immune system. 
```

> By using tools from Natural Language Processing (NLP), viral escape was modeled as an NLP problem [@doi:10.1126/science.abd7331] where a modification makes a sentence grammatically correct but semantically different.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By using tools from natural language processing (NLP), viral escape was modeled as an NLP problem [@doi:10.1126/science.abd7331] where a modification makes a sentence grammatically correct but semantically different.
```

Reviewer 2: I'm super curious what they found!!!

While it is evident that SARS-CoV-2 exhibits moderate potential for ongoing and future evolution, the relationship between mutations and pathogenicity is not yet known.
Additional data is needed in order to understand patterns of evolutionary change and whether they are likely to affect virulence.

Several factors could promote the evolution of SARS-CoV-2 including immunodeficiency and the transient exposure to antibodies directed against SARS-CoV-2 proteins. 

> A single case study of SARS-CoV-2 infection in an immunocompromised female with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and hypogammaglobulinemia [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.049] suggested that an accelerated evolution of the virus could occur in conditions of immunodeficiency. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A single case study of SARS-CoV-2 infection in an immunocompromised female with chronic lymphocytic leukemia and hypogammaglobulinemia [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.049] suggested that an accelerated evolution of the virus could occur in conditions of immunodeficiency. 
```
I don't think CLL is used 3+ times so mSystems doesn't require that it be defined!

Author: makes sense!
